Whats up everyone
Today lets do anchoring
Drop port anchor!
HWAT?!
So theres alot types of anchor out there,
the most common type now days on merchant
navy ships, especially large ships, are the
stockless type.
And that's mainly because the design is flat
and can be stored away easily.
Usually you'll see it tucked away just beneath
the bow.
This one here is our spare anchor.
A typical stockless type will have its crown,
the arms and the flukes in one piece, its
design to pivot on the shank, Shank is the
term for the center piece.
Contraty to many believe... the anchor actually
dont hold the ship, the anchor only digs into
the sea bed and holds the chain.
Its the length and weight of the chains that
holds the ship.
Its all about horizontal force , later I will
show you guys how it works.
Now At the forward station we've got two anchors
, one on each side which can be lowered or
heave up control by the windlass.
The anchor chain leads up to the hawse pipe
through the windlass, down the spurling pipe
into the chain locker where its stored.
Here is the chain locker, normally its kept
closed but today I was following chief mate
for an visual inspection.
The big drum is called the Gypsy.
Some item of interest here are the guillotine
bar, also known as bow stopper or pawl bar.
which traps and holds the chain in place,
incase the brake fails.
The metal wire attached are the lashing holding
it in place when not in use.
By putting the dog clutch into gear, we can
either heave up or lower the anchor.
Windlass is the term for this whole system
used to heave up or lower anchor and mooring
lines.
The anchor alone is about 9000kgs or 20,000
lbs, plus the chains thats quite heavy, which
is why using the windlass its still a slow
process.
Heaving up is always going to be slow,
But for lowering the anchor there is actaully
another way , a faster way which is to let
the anchor fly out.
What that means is having the anchor chain
disengaged from dog clutch and brakes, and
lowered by gravity.
The only way to stop it though is by engaging
the brakes.
Here is what it looks like.
As you can see it is quite violent, lots of
vibration, debris flying everywhere, and a
lot more risky then by motors.
If you aren't careful this might happen.
If we still have the anchor, well brakes on
tight, bar down and pin in, securing the anchor
So how do the anchor, anchor chains hold the
ship in place?
Well remember the keyword is horizontal forces.
Casey Nesitat time
Let me show you from the begining
The ship should always be down wind or down
current whichever is stronger, slightly drifting
backwards . so that when a anchor is lowered
into the water, the crown catches and set
onto the sea bed. with the engine and or the
current, walking the ship back to pay out
the chains.
A useful trick to figure out the current or
tidal direction is simply just look at the
nearby anchored ships, all anchored ship will
follow the heading of current.
A horizontal pull gives the anchor its holding
power digging into the sea bed.
The weight of the chain, this curve section
also known as the catenary, holds the ship.
So the more chain laid, the greater the holding
power
A general rule of thumb is 1:5 ratio for good
weather, 1:7 or more for bad weather.
It varies between ship size and type.
For deck officers, An anchor circle should
be drawn with the radius being the length
of cables laid plus from bow to radar antenna
so that you can monitor the ship on radar
and ecidis.
So we drop our anchor plus how many cables
we laid out plus the ship's length
see this is the anchor circle on the outside,
past position swings back and forth because
the tidal wave is semi-durinal
Dont forget to show the anchor ball & signal
! Anchor light
During anchor watches, the crew have to check
the weather and sea conditions
as well as status of the chain.
We want avoid dragging the anchor and drift
somewhere or drift into another ship, that
would be bad...
The crew will look at the chain phsyically
and report back.
The terms we use are.
up'n'down, short stay, medium stay or long
stay, long stay means there is a high chance
of dragging anchor because the chain is being
pulled like this.
To heave up, just walk the ship over the anchor
and pull up with the windlass because remebmer
its not designed to hold vertical forces.
How do you count anchor chain?
Well in the old days, every length of cable
is marked between the shackles, one shackle
is about 27.5 meters.
Nowdays modern ships have guages that show
how many chains are laid.
If you got any questions about anchoring,
make sure to comment down below and join the
discussions.
Smash that subscribe button and hit me up
on instagram, see you next time